THE FOURTH DIMENSION




                               CHAPTER I

                        FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE


There is nothing more indefinite, and at the same time more real, than
that which we indicate when we speak of the “higher.” In our social
life we see it evidenced in a greater complexity of relations. But this
complexity is not all. There is, at the same time, a contact with, an
apprehension of, something more fundamental, more real.

With the greater development of man there comes a consciousness of
something more than all the forms in which it shows itself. There is
a readiness to give up all the visible and tangible for the sake of
those principles and values of which the visible and tangible are the
representation. The physical life of civilised man and of a mere savage
are practically the same, but the civilised man has discovered a depth
in his existence, which makes him feel that that which appears all to
the savage is a mere externality and appurtenage to his true being.

Now, this higher—how shall we apprehend it? It is generally embraced
by our religious faculties, by our idealising tendency. But the higher
existence has two sides. It has a being as well as qualities. And in
trying to realise it through our emotions we are always taking the
subjective view. Our attention is always fixed on what we feel, what
we think. Is there any way of apprehending the higher after the purely
objective method of a natural science? I think that there is.

Plato, in a wonderful allegory, speaks of some men living in such a
condition that they were practically reduced to be the denizens of
a shadow world. They were chained, and perceived but the shadows of
themselves and all real objects projected on a wall, towards which
their faces were turned. All movements to them were but movements
on the surface, all shapes but the shapes of outlines with no
substantiality.

Plato uses this illustration to portray the relation between true
being and the illusions of the sense world. He says that just as a man
liberated from his chains could learn and discover that the world was
solid and real, and could go back and tell his bound companions of this
greater higher reality, so the philosopher who has been liberated, who
has gone into the thought of the ideal world, into the world of ideas
greater and more real than the things of sense, can come and tell his
fellow men of that which is more true than the visible sun—more noble
than Athens, the visible state.

Now, I take Plato’s suggestion; but literally, not metaphorically.
He imagines a world which is lower than this world, in that shadow
figures and shadow motions are its constituents; and to it he contrasts
the real world. As the real world is to this shadow world, so is the
higher world to our world. I accept his analogy. As our world in three
dimensions is to a shadow or plane world, so is the higher world to our
three-dimensional world. That is, the higher world is four-dimensional;
the higher being is, so far as its existence is concerned apart from
its qualities, to be sought through the conception of an actual
existence spatially higher than that which we realise with our senses.

Here you will observe I necessarily leave out all that gives its
charm and interest to Plato’s writings. All those conceptions of the
beautiful and good which live immortally in his pages.

All that I keep from his great storehouse of wealth is this one thing
simply—a world spatially higher than this world, a world which can only
be approached through the stocks and stones of it, a world which must
be apprehended laboriously, patiently, through the material things of
it, the shapes, the movements, the figures of it.

We must learn to realise the shapes of objects in this world of the
higher man; we must become familiar with the movements that objects
make in his world, so that we can learn something about his daily
experience, his thoughts of material objects, his machinery.

The means for the prosecution of this enquiry are given in the
conception of space itself.

It often happens that that which we consider to be unique and unrelated
gives us, within itself, those relations by means of which we are able
to see it as related to others, determining and determined by them.

Thus, on the earth is given that phenomenon of weight by means of which
Newton brought the earth into its true relation to the sun and other
planets. Our terrestrial globe was determined in regard to other bodies
of the solar system by means of a relation which subsisted on the earth
itself.

And so space itself bears within it relations of which we can
determine it as related to other space. For within space are given the
conceptions of point and line, line and plane, which really involve the
relation of space to a higher space.

Where one segment of a straight line leaves off and another begins is
a point, and the straight line itself can be generated by the motion of
the point.

One portion of a plane is bounded from another by a straight line, and
the plane itself can be generated by the straight line moving in a
direction not contained in itself.

Again, two portions of solid space are limited with regard to each
other by a plane; and the plane, moving in a direction not contained in
itself, can generate solid space.

Thus, going on, we may say that space is that which limits two portions
of higher space from each other, and that our space will generate the
higher space by moving in a direction not contained in itself.

Another indication of the nature of four-dimensional space can be
gained by considering the problem of the arrangement of objects.

If I have a number of swords of varying degrees of brightness, I can
represent them in respect of this quality by points arranged along a
straight line.

If I place a sword at A, fig. 1, and regard it as having a certain
brightness, then the other swords can be arranged in a series along the
line, as at A, B, C, etc., according to their degrees of brightness.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

If now I take account of another quality, say length, they can be
arranged in a plane. Starting from A, B, C, I can find points to
represent different degrees of length along such lines as AF, BD, CE,
drawn from A and B and C. Points on these lines represent different
degrees of length with the same degree of brightness. Thus the whole
plane is occupied by points representing all conceivable varieties of
brightness and length.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

Bringing in a third quality, say sharpness, I can draw, as in fig. 3,
any number of upright lines. Let distances along these upright lines
represent degrees of sharpness, thus the points F and G will represent
swords of certain definite degrees of the three qualities mentioned,
and the whole of space will serve to represent all conceivable degrees
of these three qualities.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

If now I bring in a fourth quality, such as weight, and try to find a
means of representing it as I did the other three qualities, I find
a difficulty. Every point in space is taken up by some conceivable
combination of the three qualities already taken.

To represent four qualities in the same way as that in which I have
represented three, I should need another dimension of space.

Thus we may indicate the nature of four-dimensional space by saying
that it is a kind of space which would give positions representative
of four qualities, as three-dimensional space gives positions
representative of three qualities.




                              CHAPTER II

                     THE ANALOGY OF A PLANE WORLD


